---
layout: default
title: Tom Robertshaw | Projects
meta-description: A list of research, development, experimental projects or contributions.
---


# Projects

Local or Live Chrome Extension
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/local-or-live
Contributed to this handy Chrome extension to provide an indication whether site is production or development environment

Royal Mail PHP Library
https://github.com/meanbee/royalmail-php-library
Contributor to this PHP library that provides package shipping rates for Royal Mail delivery

IBM Watson Visual Recognition PHP Library
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/ibm-watson-visual-recognition-php
PHP Library for consuming Watson’s Visual Recognition API

Configuration Powered CSS Magento Extension
https://github.com/meanbee/magento-configuration-powered-css
Server-side CSS generation and included based on Magento configuration settings.

Podcast Transcriber and Search
https://github.com/meanbee/poddle
Podcast transcription and search service powered by IBM Watson

Naive Bayes for Language Classification
http://tomrobertshaw.net/2015/12/introduction-to-machine-learning-with-naive-bayes/
Research and experimentation with Naive Bayes to classify website languages and ecommerce categorisation.

JavaScript Optimisation Magento Extension
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/magento-footer-js
Improve Google PageSpeed score with this extension to automatically move all JS source and in-line JS to the footer.

Magento Database Backup Tool
https://github.com/meanbee/magedbm
Always have a recent Magento database backup without sensitive customer information for development and staging environments.

Website Technology Chrome Extension
https://github.com/hivemind-research/chrome-extension
Chrome extension to show what technologies a site is running.  Powered by askhivemind.com

Personalised CMS Content Magento Extension
https://github.com/meanbee/PersonalisedContent
Show different marketing and promotional content to ecommerce customers based on their prior browsing and purchasing habits.

Articles To Podcast
https://github.com/meanbee/articles-to-podcast
Convert your saved articles in Pocket to a personal podcast using IBM Watson text to speech technology.

Virtual Shopping Assistant Magento Extension
https://github.com/meanbee/magento-shopping-assistant
A virtual re-imagining of the sales assistant. Customers can invite shopping assistants to browse with them and start up a text or voice chat without browser plugins.

MageHero Developer News Site
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/magehero
Contributed to development of this Magento developer news site.

Responsive Ecommerce Survey
http://tomrobertshaw.net/2014/04/responsive-ecommerce-analysis/
Researched the proliferation of responsive design within the most popular ecommerce sites.

Magento SVG Helper
https://github.com/meanbee/Magento-SVG-Helper
Tiny Magento extension to help frontend developers get SVG file contents into templates

Doors of Bath
http://doorsofbath.com/
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/doorsofbath
Art project with Shari (http://www.sharirobertshaw.com/) exploring the ornate design of Bath front doors!

Mailcheck integration for Magento
https://github.com/meanbee/magento-mailcheck
Reduces miss-spelled email addresses during checkout and account sign-up in Magento.

MageCert
https://github.com/meanbee/magecert
Sharing my and my colleague’s revision notes on the Magento Developer Certification

Magento Cache Viewer
https://github.com/meanbee/Meanbee_CacheViewer
Visual indicator overlaid on page to identify cache hits and misses.

Youtube App for Spotify
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/Youtube-App-for-Spotify
Watch youtube video of currently playing song, synchronised.

Order Success Page Social Sharing Magento Extension
https://github.com/meanbee/ordershare
Allow customers to share their order items to social networks with this simple Magento extension.

Ecommerce Survey
https://askhivemind.com/
Long-term research project identifying the popularity trends of ecommerce technologies.

Mosaic
https://github.com/MageHack/mosiac
Full page grid product browsing

Literally Deep Fried
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/Literally-Deep-Fried
Find incorrect uses of the phrase “literally” in social media.

Browserbeats
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/browserbeats
Web media library and player.

Magento Module Downloads Geckoboard
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/magento-module-downloads-geckoboard
Tool to show the number of times your Magento extension has been downloaded in Geckoboard.

Codebase Statistics Geckoboard
https://github.com/bobbyshaw/codebase-geckoboard
Show interesting statistics about recent progress in Codebase, a project management system, within Geckoboard.

Magento HTML 5 Compatibility Extension
https://github.com/meanbee/Meanbee_Tinymce5
Adds HTML 5 elements to allowed elements list within Magento CMS.
